who goes in and the mathematician James
Lindsay they have co-authored things
together and they have perpetrated a
Sokol style hoax I don't know if you
recall the Sokol hoax I was about 25
years ago or so but Ilana so call I'm
actually sure how you pronounce his name
in French but Alain Sokol is a physicist
who perpetrated a hoax on the journal
social texts
it was an amazing hoax where he wrote
pure gibberish about the postmodern
meaning of quantum mechanics and it was
accepted and published to quite
devastating effect and Peter and James
have done something similar here with
the whole field of Gender Studies they
have published a paper titled the
conceptual penis as a social construct
and there is some delightful stuff in
here it really is a hilarious piece of
satire here's a taste of the language
quote we conclude that penises are not
best understood as the male sexual organ
or as a male reproductive organ but
instead as an enacted social construct
that is both damaging and problematic
for society and future generations
the conceptual penis presents
significant problems for gender identity
and reproductive identity within social
and family dynamics is exclusionary to
disenfranchised communities based upon
gender or reproductive identity is an
enduring source of abuse for women and
other gender marginalized groups and
individuals is the universal
performative source of rape and is the
conceptual driver behind much of climate
change end quote
I'll give you a little more the language
here in as much as masculinity is
essentially performative so too is the
conceptual penis the penis in the words
of Judith Butler quote can only be
understood through reference to what is
barred from the signifier within the
domain of corporeal legibility Butler
1993 I don't know if that's a real quote
or not apparently they made up a bunch
of their sources and quotes continuing
with their text the penis should not be
understood as an honest expression of
the performers intent should it be
presented in a performance of
masculinity or hyper masculinity
thus the isomorphism between the
conceptual penis and was referred to
throughout discursive feminist
literature as quote toxic hyper
masculinity is one defined upon a vector
of male cultural machismo braggadocio
well with the conceptual penis playing
the roles of subject object and verb of
action the result of this trichotomy of
roles is to place hyper masculine men
both within and outside of competing
discourses whose dynamics as seen via
post-structuralist discourse analysis
enact a systemic interplay of power in
which hyper masculine men used the
conceptual penis to move themselves from
powerless subject positions to powerful
ones than they referenced Foucault there
this is utter nonsense this was written
to be completely impenetrable
and yet it was published in a
peer-reviewed journal they apparently
had two expert reviewers who deemed this
worth publishing
and then there's this delightful bit
about manspreading quote it is also
observable in the hyper male
performative behavioral trope of quote
man spreading that is inconsiderately
spread in his legs too widely in public
for example on public transport such as
planes trains and automobiles
especially subways and buses the usual
excuse given for man spreading is
centered directly in the conceptual
penis as a male social discourse the
anatomical penis and testicles are
attributed as needing space in order to
facilitate the male individual's quote
comfort this behavior seen from the
perspective of the conceptual penis as a
performative social construct is clearly
a dominating occupation of physical
space akin to raping the empty space
around him that is best understood via
the machismo braggadocio isomorphism to
toxic hyper masculinity Perkins 2015
this is glorious
okay this final bit linking the
conceptual penis to climate change
climate change and the conceptual penis
this is section 2.2 of the paper no are
the consequences of hyper-masculine
machismo braggadocio isomorphic
identification with the conceptual penis
more problematic than concerning the
issue of climate change climate change
is driven by nothing more than by
certain damaging themes in hyper
masculinity that can be best understood
via the dominant rapacious approach to
climate ecology identifiable within the
conceptual penis our planet is rapidly
approaching the much warned about two
degrees centigrade climate change
threshold and due to the patriarchal
power dynamics that maintain present
capitalist structures especially with
regard to the fossil fuel industry the
connection between hyper masculine
dominance of scientific political and
economic discourses and the irreparable
damage to our ecosystem is made clear
destructive unsustainable hegemonic Lee
male approaches to pressing
environmental policy and action are the
predictable results of a raping of
nature by a male dominated mindset this
mindset is best captured by recognizing
the role the conceptual penis holds over
masculine psychology when it is applied
to our natural environment especially
virgin environments that can be cheaply
despoiled for their material resources
and left dilapidated and diminished when
our patriarchal approaches to economic
gain have stolen their inherent worth
the extrapolation of the rape culture
inherent in the conceptual penis becomes
clear at best climate change is
genuinely an example of hyper
patriarchal society metaphorically man
spreading into the global ecosystem
oh my god all right well this is this
pleasure awaits you at skeptic calm
which is Michael Shermer site and he has
a whole breakdown of the hoax peter
Bogosian went by the name of Peter Boyle
and James Lindsay went by the name of
Jamie Lynn say nice work guys okay a
little more on my live podcast tour
that's coming up in the fall I don't do
a lot of public speaking these days
in fact I was quite astonished to
realize not that long ago that I went a
year more than more than a year without
getting on an airplane this is largely a
consequence of having young kids I just
haven't wanted to be away from my girls
for the most part so I haven't been out
there speaking very much but that is
about to change and I'm organizing a
tour which I think will go from probably
October into the spring or summer of
next year and I'll do a couple of cities
a month but I need help planning this
tour I need to know where I should be
going and I need to know how big the
venue's should be when I get there
so I'm preparing an online survey that I
would greatly appreciate all of you
answering this is actually a way to help
determine whether or not I come to your
city because well I can tell how many
people listen to the podcast in each
area it's not clear to me what the
demand is in each area it could be much
harder for me to sell out a two thousand
seat auditorium in New York than in
Dallas say even though there are many
more listeners in New York so if you
want to give me feedback in this area
and help me figure out the logistics of
the tour and even Bend the tour in the
direction of your home city I would
really appreciate your feedback on the
survey so if you're not on my email list
the first thing to do is join it you can
pause this podcast right now and go to
sam harris or RG /e mail underscore sign
up or just go to my home page and you'll
see the newsletter link in the upper
right hand corner and then probably two
days or so after I released this podcast
I will send out a link to that survey
and I will also put a link to that
survey on my blog where I embed this
podcast
I have a few other events coming up it
looks like I'm gonna be in Vancouver in
early November
perhaps with Richard Dawkins and
Lawrence Krauss I'm not sure if they've
confirmed yet and just as with my
podcast tour I'm now making it a
requirement of any speaking event that I
sign on to that I get to notify podcast
supporters early and give them access to
tickets before they go on sale to the
general public and I think in the
general case it'll be a week or so
before
obviously there are some places where I
can't do this I couldn't do this at the
TED conference or you know it wouldn't
make sense to do it at a college where
students have to get priority but
wherever possible I will make this
demand because it's a way to give back
to all of you who are supporting the
podcast when Richard Dawkins and I had
our events in Los Angeles I think the
first one sold out in 24 hours and the
second one sold out in a day or two
after we announced it so depending on
the city the opportunity to get tickets
to events can be pretty limited so it
strikes me that for those of you who
actually want to get to a live event
getting early information is
occasionally a fairly good perk so I
will do that wherever possible and
finally this was a week of some
controversy for me there was an article
in Vox written by Richard Nisbett the
psychologist and a couple of other
scientists which has been spread around
quite a bit
attacking me and charles murray for our
podcast
and it did this in terms that were not
entirely unexpected I knew the one I
invited Charles on my podcast and had a
cordial conversation with him I was
going to get some blowback and here it
is
the article really seems beneath
responding to from my point of view but
for the fact that it has been amplified
to the degree that it has I saw the
editor-in-chief of Vox who published it
as recline spread it around on social
media he has a very large platform and
the whole the whole attitude both of the
article and of the subsequent discussion
of it is to brand us explicitly as
racialist s' which means racist of
course and pseudo-scientists giving
voice to our white supremacy and the
arguments in the article such as they
are rely on simply ignoring or
distorting what we actually said in the
podcast so this is all very frustrating
I when I saw Klein tweet about this
talking about how easy the science was
to dismantle and how dangerous it was to
give a platform to someone like Murray I
invited him to come on this podcast to
enlighten me and I don't know if he's
gonna take me up on that we have an
email exchange underway he wrote to me
and I wrote back to him many of you have
called my attention to the Vox article
seeming to think that it required a
response
there's so much wrong with it it really
doesn't but I feel like the larger issue
of just how difficult it is to have a
civil conversation about facts that are
politically charged or potentially so
that does require further conversation
and that's in large measure becoming the
purpose of many of these podcasts so I'm
open to speaking with Ezra he seems like
a reasonable guy and I hope some good
would come of it
but I'll give you a sense of what I said
to him I can't read you his email
because it's private but I can read you
parts of my response to it and that
contains the following
conversation I propose we have wouldn't
be narrowly focused on the science of
intelligence I stand by what I said in
my intro to the Murray podcast the
science that I claimed was
uncontroversial is in fact
uncontroversial what I propose we
discuss is this atmosphere wherein many
otherwise sane and ethical people
reliably become obscurantists and attack
anyone who Demers as an enemy fit only
to be silenced
I doubt any such discussion could be had
with the authors of the paper you
published it is a shoddy piece of work
and they appear to be part of the moral
panic I was describing again my desire
to speak with Murray was not based on a
prior interest in the genetic basis of
intelligence much less a fascination for
racial differences in intelligence
rather it was out of my growing concern
for how fraught our conversations on
politically charged topics have become
the publication of this paper has simply
added more fuel to the machinery of
defamation that I've been trying to
resist then I called Klein's attention
to a paragraph in the paper that is
emblematic of its quality I'll read this
paragraph to you just so you can see how
a ideological knee-jerk reaction works
its way into the brains of one's critics
here it is from their paper the
consensus he says is that IQ exists that
is extraordinarily important to life
outcomes of all sorts that is largely
heritable and that we don't know of any
interventions that can improve the part
that is not heritable the consensus also
includes the observation that the IQs of
black Americans are lower on average
than that of whites and most
contentiously
that this and other differences among
racial groups is based at least in part
in genetics end quote and then I wrote
to climb read that last phrase again
leaving IQ aside for a moment or the
author is really suggesting that quote
other differences between racial groups
are not based at least in part in
genetics is it really quote most
contentious to say that a person's skin
color is based at least in part in
genetics you must see the problem with
this sort of writing and thinking and
more generally speaking here clearly the
taboo is for psychological traits right
that are partly heritable
that have their basis in genetics
this is so sloppy
sloppiness extended to things that you
would not think we're possible I mean
for instance the author's attacked me
for not raising the Flynn effect with
Marie as a challenge to the idea that
there isn't a massive environmental
contribution to IQ differences across
races the Flynn effect as you might
recall is the fact that IQs have been
improving about three points or so
decade after decade over the last
century of testing and then the tests
have to be renormalized is that the
black community is where the white
community was in 1948 say they claim
that I never raised this with Murray and
what a terrific editorial and moral and
intellectual lapse that is well of
course I raised that exact quote with
Murray for that reason and we spoke for
five minutes about the Flint effect and
Murray is the person who named the Flynn
effect after Flynn in the bell curve and
in any case we now know that the Flynn
effect does not raise the components of
IQ that differentiate whites and blacks
and I believe Flynn himself now
acknowledges the difference so this is a
at best and uninformed summary of our
current understanding by the authors of
this Vox paper but I think that's
probably to charitable and
interpretation of what happened here
surely they know that their use of the
Flynn effect here is specious
and again what makes this so obnoxious
and unprofessional is that the purpose
here is to defame Murray and myself as
racist pseudo-scientists the point is
not to have an honest and open ended
conversation about facts the point is to
convince academic institutions not to
invite someone like Murray to speak and
when Klein pushed this article that he
published out on social media to his
1.74 million Twitter followers his first
tweet read excellent look at the science
that got skipped over and ignored in Sam
Harris's interview with charles murray
this article is not a look at such
science it is an exercise in
cherry-picking okay his next tweet a
point the authors make and that liberals
should consider is that Murray is less
dangerous as an IQ theorist
than as a free speech icon okay so
Murray is dangerous and I'm dangerous
for having given him a platform
the next tweet his IQ work is easily
challenged this is the one that got to
me and got me to invite him on the
podcast his IQ work is easily challenged
but if promoting it is recast as
intellectual courage and commitment to
free speech that's disastrous okay well
as I told Klein and I would like all of
you to understand I have heard from many
scientists and public intellectuals
whose names you would recognize and who
don't have a racist bone in their bodies
celebrating my conversation with Marie
and lamenting how he's been treated all
these years and they will not come out
in public for fear of having their names
dragged through the mud this is the
environment in which we're now living
this is the problem of social taboo and
moral panic that I'm trying to tackle on
this podcast
it's a problem that Klein and the
authors of this paper are in flaming
they're on the wrong side of this I'll
give you one more piece of the email
exchange here because because it's
relevant and it is relevant to today's
podcast I'm responding to the client's
claim that the issue is way more complex
than Marie and I painted it and I say it
is certainly more complex in the
strawman the paper's authors constructed
no one is talking about a single gene
for intelligence and neither I nor Marie
denied the environment contributes the
difference as we see across groups and
between individuals in fact we use the
same analogy to height that the authors
used height is highly heritable this is
another example of they attack us with
analogies that we ourselves have used
right I mean it's astonishing this thing
got published
I wonder if Nisbet's next paper is gonna
be about the conceptual penis
and way back to my email with climb in
fact we use the same analogy to height
that the authors used height is highly
heritable but you can surely stun two
persons or a whole populations growth
through malnutrition so merely seeing a
group of short people one can't be sure
to what degree the environment determine
their height and yet it remains a fact
that if a person doesn't have the genes
to be seven feet tall he won't be it is
utterly uncontroversial to say this it
is also utterly uncontroversial to say
that while there may be many ways to
prevent a person from reaching his full
intellectual height if he doesn't have
the genes to be the next Alan Turing he
won't be that either
among the many uncontroversial facts of
the Vox paper Alive's is that once we
make environments truly equivalent
equally enriched stable motivating etc
any difference we notice between people
or between groups will be due to genes
I'm gonna say that again so it just
doesn't get lost once we make
environments truly equivalent there's no
question that would be a good thing to
do we want everyone to have the same
enrichment and opportunity right but
once we do that any difference we notice
between people and between groups will
be due to genes what's more not back to
my text what's more we should expect
such differences for most things we care
about along with most things we don't
care about it would be a miracle if the
mean value for any heritable trait were
precisely the same across two
genetically distinct populations
generation after generation does this
matter I don't think so
as Marie and I spelled out repeatedly we
still need to treat people as
individuals this is not a quote anodyne
claim meant to conceal our white
supremacy as the author suggests but the
only ethical and reasonable thing to do
the authors write as though any proven
genetic difference in intelligence
between races would be morally and
politically catastrophic and so the only
remedy is to lie about the state of our
knowledge and defame anyone who's not
taken in by these lies as a racialist
really racist who is peddling quote
pseudoscience end quote and all of this
is relevant to today's podcast in a few
ways first today I'm speaking with
Siddhartha Mukherjee who is a physician
and scientist who focuses on the
genetics of cancer and
in this wonderful book the gene which
talks about the history of our coming to
understand genetics and what the future
holds and one thing the future holds is
whether we like it or not we will be
finding out things about ourselves and
about whole populations that are
potentially very charged politically
almost everything about us with the
exception of superficial features of our
lives like what language you are taught
when you're a child or what clothes you
wear or what food you eat right but
almost everything about us that is
really about us and this includes much
of our psychology things like
intelligence and personality traits like
extraversion versus introversion or
conscientiousness stuff that is at the
core of our personality sexual
orientation all of this is in large
measure based on our genes we know this
this is no longer up for grabs so
insofar as we continue to understand
ourselves through biology we will
discover things like a different rate of
expression of the relevant hundred genes
for intelligence in this case in
different populations again it would be
something akin to a miracle if
everything we care about that is
genetically heritable to any degree were
tuned to exactly the same level across
populations right that is the mean of a
population I'm not speaking about
specific individuals we should expect
all populations to overlap significantly
right so you can find individuals in any
group who are extremely high or
extremely low in one trait or another
again this is something that Marie and I
spelled out at great length the only
appropriate response to this deluge of
knowledge that is coming
to make a good-faith effort to talk
about it honestly and to realize that
our goodwill toward one another and our
political goals and our concern for
human rights is not vulnerable to these
facts it need not be right we don't need
to cower and fear in the face of facts
I'll give you an example that is trivial
right but this is the sort of thing that
hysterics could make much of so it
recently it was revealed I don't I don't
know the state of this research now but
this is a couple of years old it was
revealed that basically everyone who was
not African or of African descent had
some degree of Neanderthal DNA in them
right so only pure Africans or people of
pure African descent or pure Homo
sapiens according to this genetic
research again I don't know if there
have been any caveat issued since but
that was the thesis when it was
published a couple of years ago now I
found this delightful I made some jokes
about it on Twitter
it obviously cuts against a white
supremacist racist narrative I mean the
you can actually say that only black
people are a hundred percent human on
the basis of this alright that's great
but imagine if it had been the other way
right and you had white supremacist
nitwits like Richard Spencer talking
about how you know now we know why black
people are inferior their part in the
and earth all we cannot worry about that
stuff
it could have come out either way our
obvious goal should be to maximize human
opportunity across the board and the the
master algorithm here is to treat people
as individuals identity politics is
going to be the end of us that is a
moral and intellectual dead end so we
have to find some way of breaking this
spell and you can flip this around what
does one thing I said decline in my
email notice how little you or anyone
else cares about the data that shows
that Asians have a higher mean IQ than
whites how likely is anyone to defame
somebody who reports those data this is
a disparity that no one is thinking
about this is not a problem we need to
correct for we need to give everyone the
opportunities that they can most take
advantage of and it is true that in any
population most people can't take
advantage of the opportunity to be a
theoretical physicist that is a game you
can only play with a certain IQ just as
you can't be an Olympic sprinter unless
you have a certain complement of
fast-twitch muscle fibers both of these
abilities mental and physical have their
basis in human biology these are not the
sorts of facts that should inspire
witch-hunts
relevant to today's podcast with Mukerji
on one level this is just an unhappy
accident but Mukerji in his book the
gene as you'll hear Mukerji took a
different line with murray than I did
and it was one that I thought not
altogether fair and this was not
something I was going to raise with him
in the podcast but what happened is
people who heard my podcast with Murray
and who have read mukajee's book noticed
the disparity here and urged me to talk
about it with him and this was often in
the spirit of not being satisfied with
the conversation I had with Murray you
know they they wanted me to get
mukajee's skeptical take on Murray in
the podcast and then when this Vox
article broke about 24 hours before I
just couldn't avoid it and it kind of
pushed our conversation in an odd
direction I felt bringing it in but this
is what this podcast is for the whole
point is to talk to smart people about
important topics and sometimes these
conversations get pushed in a direction
that is contentious and we work it out
or don't write and then we can do a
post-mortem on the failures but this
conversation today was by no means a
failure and I think the most important
thing about it piece of either
controversy over my podcast with Murray
is that you will hear in Mukerji someone
who disagrees with Murray and me to some
degree about just how much can be said
at this moment about intelligence
scientifically but this is someone who
does not endorse the vilification of
Murray at all
with that preamble that is all to
prepare you for the second hour of this
podcast where I for reasons that would
otherwise be somewhat inexplicable I
take the conversation in the direction
of this controversy about intelligence
and race
all right so after that very long
preamble let me properly introduce
today's guest Siddhartha Mukherjee is an
oncologist and researcher he is an
assistant professor of medicine at
Columbia University and a cancer
physician at Columbia University and NYU
Presbyterian Hospital
he's a former Rhodes scholar he
graduated from Stanford the University
of Oxford where he got a PhD in studying
cancer-causing viruses and he got his
medical degree from Harvard Medical
School his laboratory focuses on
discovering new cancer drugs he's
published articles and commentary and
such journals as nature the New England
Journal of Medicine neuron and in
publications like the New York Times and
The New Yorker The New Republic he won
the Pulitzer Prize for his book on
cancer the emperor of all maladies and
his most recent book which is the topic
of our conversation is the gene
in history
and now I give you so
Mukerjee I am here with Siddhartha
Mukherjee Siddhartha thanks for coming
on the podcast yeah my pleasure
well listen you are you have a great job
it looks like you're doing amazing
things in the world on at least two
fronts I just want to start before we
get into your book I want to start by
getting you to describe what it is you
do and how much of your time is spent in
each of these two careers we hope you
have a career as a physician and as a
writer both a very high level so
describe what you're doing so I'm a
physician scientist and the particular
area I work on is the is in the clinical
realm I work on leukemias I'm an
oncologist
so I treat cancers I see patients with
cancer my area within cancer is Leukemia
and Lymphoma basically cancers of the
blood cells although I certainly see
other cancers as well and treat other
cancers as well much of so so that's one
aspect of my physician scientist like
the other part is I do laboratory
research I do basic cancer research our
laboratory has really couple of major
fronts we can talk about them but I work
on cancer genetics we've discovered
genes that are implicated in cancers
particularly blood cancers and we try to
use that information about cancers to
try to figure out how to treat make new
treatments and then bring that all of
that stuff back to the clinic to sort of
make a difference in in human lives so
it's you know it's been called a bench
to bench to bedside but of course it's a
long and complicated route so that's the
world I live in I I have a laboratory
they actually across the street from
where I see patients so you know in a
rather physical sense I mean in the road
in between so now I cut you one job
short you have three jobs you're a
physician you're a scientist and you are
also a writer so - and how much of your
time is spent writing these books we're
about to talk about and your New Yorker
pieces the you know the time is spent
it's very uneven so you know my primary
life is as a physician scientist but
and when the books come they you know
the birth of a book is like the birth of
a baby the books take over your life for
a while though sometimes bloodier they
take over for a while and then and and
then they go out into the world and and
eventually they sort of take on a life
of their own one thing that's nice is
that for the for the first book Emperor
of all maladies I then collaborated with
Ken Burns and a bunch of other people
cancer
geneticists and cancer biologists on
making a documentary so I was that book
sort of acquired a second life if you
will and that's gonna happen with the
gene as well we're gonna Ken Burns's
again I'm going to do a PBS documentary
on the gene so it's it's a it's a
somewhat it's like a sine curve it goes
up for a while then it dies down for a
bit and goes up for a while
etc and you know the New Yorker is not
the only outlet that I write for I write
for the New York Times Magazine actually
written much more for them in the past
and also for other places like vice
where I do also some editorial work but
really it's all focused on questions I
write pieces not because I'm on salary
at any of these places but because I am
interested by when a topic interests me
or when or when the editors wanted
excerpt things from the book is when
when those pieces appear that either
book excerpts chosen by the editors or
their topics that I initiate because I'm
interested in them right right well I
want to talk about the gene in
particular your more recent book I have
some questions about cancer I'd like to
ask you at the end unfortunately have
not read Emperor of all maladies for
which you won the Pulitzer but I've read
the gene and and that's your more recent
book and that gets to some really
fundamental science obviously but
fundamental questions of human existence
and public policy and ethics and this is
as rich a topic as anyone can find in
the 21st century and I want us to move
through it fairly systematically because
I can assume a fairly even a very
educated audience on this podcast and in
other episodes I would be happy to use a
term like phenotype without bothering to
define it I would just just assume that
people can look it up if they're
confused but in this conversation I
think we should do our best not to leave
anyone behind on anything because the
topics are so fundamental and and
important that we go ahead and stop me
when you think that you know when the
whole point of the book is to minimize
jargon now that involves some
simplification yeah necessarily so we'll
try to try to cut the right balance with
that that's a tough thing to do because
the audience's you're saying is
simultaneously very sophisticated but
some of the issues here are so
fundamental it that if we if we don't if
we gloss over them I suspect we'll lose
sight of very important issues yeah and
they're just interesting facts that jump
out of even the definition of a word
that you are quite sure you understand
and use without any self-consciousness
let's start where you look how the path
you take through the book it's very much
of a historical tour of our
understanding of the basis of life and
inheritance so you trace it from its
beginning in really in just
philosophical speculation you start with
Pythagoras and Plato and Aristotle but
then it wasn't until Mendel that we
arrived at a really a crucial
understanding of the the atomic and
information-theoretic aspect of
inheritance so it doesn't remind people
about the significance of what Mendel
did but if it's okay with you let's
start with a little before Mendel and
let's start with with people that you
mentioned Pythagoras Aristotle Plato the
question of human heredity why is it
that we look like our parents why we why
we look unlike our parents is a question
that really obsessed people scientists
thinkers philosophers for generations
and-and-and twins to that idea and it's
very important to make it very clear is
that even in Plato even in Aristotle
he'll have simultaneously the desire to
understand rarity and
desire to manipulate human heredity
those things come hand in hand that's
one of the messages of the book is that
no sooner have you have we begun to
understand the principle of principles
of heredity because of the aspirations
that we have as humans do it's some
ancient desire clearly but to guarantee
the best for our children
the minute the heredity does not live in
abstraction even for a minute it
immediately becomes concrete it
immediately becomes it jumps to life
literally and makes and begins to work
its way into fundamental questions about
who are we what do we want to transmit
how do we aspire to see ourselves how do
we aspire to see our children our
startled wrote about this Plato wrote
about this they didn't understand what
heredity was necessarily in current
considered scientific conception but
they had strong ideas about it and those
ideas were powerfully twinned to the
notion that they would change human
beings if we could they could manipulate
it hmm well that we're gonna get to the
topic of eugenics but I think the
punchline I take away from what you just
said is that eugenics on some level is
unavoidable I mean we all begin
attempting to practice it the moment we
start thinking about genes that's that
that's exactly the point the point is
that the aspirations to manipulate genes
come directly out of some ancient human
desire which is very related ultimately
to you know as I said wanting the best
for yourself and your children so so and
and we see this pattern recurring over
and over again in in in this book in
fact it's obviously one of the one of
the drivers in this book is that is to
realize that you know it's not as if in
2017 we've always had an ascended to
some kind of higher plane where we've
been able to somehow divorce the orc or
cut our understanding of genetics from
our desire to manipulate it in fact it's
only been amplified well come to these
topics but it's important to underscore
them right from the beginning so on to
Mendel Mendel is an important
interesting character in this book the
first version of the book didn't begin
with Mendel but I thought that and and
I'll talk to you about how I
reorganize some of these issues but
Mendel is of course the is a very for me
the most most obvious way to begin this
story and that's because even though
Mendel didn't coin the word gene
he performed experiments that allowed
him to get to the concept of the gene
whose mental Mendel was a monk we know
I've been to you know I've looked
through you know whatever papers there
are on mental them some of them in
translation some of them I had
translated from the original Germans
Medal was a was a monk he lived in what
is now the Czech Republic most of his
life time in a city called Bruno which
was a a city center a relatively active
place the he was he lived most of his
life in a monastery and attached to that
monastery was a garden Mendel the monk
like many other monks Parsons naturally
people who certainly were were part of
the of the of the clergy was interested
in questions of Natural Science he was
also a national scientist and he was an
Augustinian in fact many Augustinians
trained in botany they trained in
biology they trained in geology and
Mendel was was it was carried this
tradition forward and the question that
Mendel asked was a very simple question
which is if you if you take hereditary
traits that are that of that move across
generations what is the pattern of that
movement is it that these traits once
you mix them together do they blend like
a akka Waring blender or is there
something about them that is always
there's something different about them
now interesting he you know the dominant
theory in Mendel's time was this Waring
blender blender kind of theory this idea
that that and in fact it makes make some
intuitive sense you know your your
height is some kind of average between
your mother and your father
you're the shape of your nose
color of your hair is often some kind of
average so it makes a lot of intuitive
sense but of course it doesn't make
entire intuitive sense because if that
was true you couldn't explain gender you
know gender is not the average of your
of your two parents every generation
produced somehow seems to retain the
information about male physiology and
female physiology male anatomy and
female anatomy and then seems to be able
to regenerate this information so even
though even the most obvious if you
think about it for a second there was a
problem that he had to explain these two
peculiar contradictions Mendel doesn't
write about these contradictions he went
straight into the experiments and his
experiments Mendel's genius was to boil
the experiment down to very simple a
very simple idea which is you know if
you take two traits and and you read
them to be true in in in an organism two
strains of organisms what happens when
you mix them what happens in the first
generation what happened in the second
generation and what he found was
astonishing and what he found was that
if you did this experiment with peas
that you would that these traits seemed
to behave in a very odd manner they did
first of all it did not blend one trait
became dominant over the other the
second thing was that as they moved
through the generations the traits
didn't go away they had the capacity to
be retained in in some kind of a
indivisible or you know they'll be
struggle for analogies atomistic form
like it couldn't be split apart
they didn't sort of the Waring blender
didn't blend them all away
they remained true to their original
essence and then he also found that that
they they acted independently of each
other will really like somewhat like
particles now this there's a lot of
debate looking back at Mendel whether he
was solving the problem of generality in
general whether he was interested in in
plant hybridization so the smallness of
the experiment I happened to believe
having read Mendel over and over again
that he was very aware that his
experiments had something important to
say about how organisms create their
form and function so he of course didn't
use the word gene
he did if you read his papers and
perhaps this is the way to read them in
in in contemporary time did you read the
papers you do get the sense of his idea
that information is involved he codes
the idea of a gene he called it a big a
big a and small way for instance so I I
don't know how his history will will
sort of eventually solve solve the
question of how much mental knew about
what he had eventually found but
certainly a tube to my reading there's a
strong hint that number one Mendel
understood that what he found was very
consequential that traits did not move
in this Waring blender form but in fact
had a kind of again we struggle with
with with modern words for this but had
a kind of atomic quality about them they
were indivisible they were particulate
and they moved across generations in
whole in wholesome you know in a kind of
whole form and and that was his that was
the basic and the word and they followed
and this is an important piece as well
they followed mathematical laws and
ratios which would be very tough to
capture if you were just sort of
blending everything together well
there's one way way to solve that
problem we can clone some of that DNA
that was left on those manuscripts and
raise the resulting human being in a
monastery near a pea garden and then ask
him what he's thinking well to me what's
interesting about all of this is that
you know I I was at a conference
recently and I I one of the things that
I tried to do was to remind people of
the exact dimensions of that garden and
of course it is strikingly small you
know it's it's it's about the size of
three rooms and from those three rooms
Springs all of this discussion today
about gene cloning and ethics and etc
etc so yeah that's remarkable so let's
talk a little bit about what we now know
that Mendel didn't and essentially the
the basics of information flow in
biological systems so you have genes to
RNA to amino acids to proteins just
remind listeners of that sequence a
little bit there are two ways you can
think about the information flow one way
is that genes encode instructions
they usually encode instructions by by
the instruct the formation of RNA this
RNA itself can can give rise to
important functions in cells and bodies
but also this RNA then gets translated
into proteins which are strings of amino
acids can be even further chemically
modified but our fundamental strings of
amino acids and these strings of amino
acids ultimately are responsible for
much of the form and function that we
see in living organisms so there's a
there's there's information transfer you
can think about genes as the the master
code of instructions the RNA has a kind
of soft copy although as I said it
itself has has important functions
itself can carry out much of the
important functions and that RNA is
translated into proteins which are
responsible for most of what we know
about features and functions of
organisms so that you know the color of
your hair the color of your eyes the
signals that go between cells that
instruct cells how to be and what to
what to be many of these are either
proteins themselves or their products
that are created by proteins there is
both the protein product of genetic
transcription and then there's just the
fact that some of these products also
regulate the function of genes as well
so that's an important piece that the
regulation of genes is and isn't is a
crucial piece and it was it was known
for a while that that so the question of
course is you know the cells in your eye
and the sellers in your the cells in
your retina and the cells in your blood
have essentially give or take some
exceptions the same genetic information
the same DNA how is it that the cells in
your IR or your retina are very
different from the cells in your in your
blood and it turns out that genes are
regulated so it's so it the the analogy
that I use is that although the the
symphonic score if you were if you were
to use that analogy the musical score is
the same in the eye and in the
in the in the blood the I sell chooses
to play out certain parts of that score
and in doing so picking out certain bars
picking out certain sections it
obviously the output of the genetic
output that it has in RNA and proteins
is different and that is partly
responsible or the difference between
your retina and your the cells in your
retina and the sounds in your cells in
your blood and there there's really no
clear boundary between species we're
just talking about genes as information
there's no DNA that is intrinsically
human and there was no first human both
of those are correct and they're very
important consequences so the fact that
there is no that the genetic code seems
for the most part there are few you know
that it could be minor quibble with that
sentence but for the most part the
genetic code is identical between blue
whales and bacteria and humans first of
all that's that is a powerful powerful
argument for evolution we'll set that
aside for a second but but in fact that
there is that there is the flow
information has been conserved across
organisms across the entire biological
world and and you're right there is
nothing fundamentally human about human
DNA if you were to put as we as
experiments have shown you can put a
yeast gene into a human cell and for the
most part the human cell will take that
yeast gene and make RNA and proteins out
of that East gene you can take a viral
gene and put it into into a bacterium
and for the most part the virus will
take that viral gene make RNA and
protein out of that viral gene and
there's nothing intrinsic to one versus
the other again there will be there's
some minor sort of scientific quibbles
about about what I just said but that's
for the most part true and again as the
with respect to species the boundary
between species is blurry in time -
there was no there was no moment where
in the primate line if you had a time
machine you could
back and point to the first human being
exactly right
they you know it depends on what we mean
by by blury in a genetic sense if
there's a contest continuity but but of
course as you know very well part of the
formation of species is reproductive
isolation so and thereby leading to the
the formation of species so so in a
genetic sense you're absolutely right
there's a there's there's continuity but
that itself you know doesn't make
species species formation is I'm gonna
discuss it a little bit it's not the
central subject of the book but species
formation is a little more complicated
than than just genetic continuum yeah so
I want to just touch on this topic of
eugenics because you can't avoid it for
long and as you just indicated this is
just part and parcel of understanding
what genes are or even attempting to
understand them and this is this idea
that now obviously
eugenics is a highly stigmatized word
for good reason given fairly recent
human history and we can talk about that
but just this basic issue of
caring about how the next generation
turns out as a possible parent maybe if
you marry a person because they're smart
and beautiful and not too crazy and you
think there'll be a good parent and you
wouldn't select them as a mate if they
weren't these things this seems to
amount to a very crude form of eugenics
doesn't it
well eugenics has a kinship and mate
selection etc our topics of their own I
mean the way I like to think about
eugenics yeah you're right there's a
there's a there's it seems that there's
an ancient desire that we have which is
ultimately related to the idea of you
know how to best create the best future
for our children that's that's that's
and that's an ancient desire eugenics
has to do with there's a so it's
important to distinguish between those
aspirations which are present in
multiple cultures present in ancient
cultures eugenics is a kind of
deliberation on that idea it brings it
to a particular kind of
self-consciousness and it is the idea
that we can deliberately prospectively
intentionally manipulate human heredity
in order to create the the best human
humans for the second of in the next
generation and in doing so improve the
human race or species in Victorian words
but we have used them here in general so
the forward march as it were I mean look
the reason we're having this entire
conversation I think is that is a work
of pivotal moment in in history we'll
talk I'm sure more about this but as you
know just to give give give the
listeners a kind of advance flavor three
or four months ago the National Academy
of Sciences wrote a document saying that
for the first time it would be
permissible under extreme circumstances
under you know conditions where there is
a disease that causes extraordinary
suffering to intervene on the human
genome in a in a manner that would make
that information perpetually permanently
heritable in humans in other words in
sperm and egg forming cells were
so-called germline genetic or genomic
modification
everyone who's listening to this should
know or will know that this is a
momentous point in history we are
essentially saying that we are a machine
that has begun to learn to read and
write its own instructions so therefore
the question arises you know when in the
past whenever we what has happened when
we when we've been tempted to read and
write our own instructions and and and
just to point out there's a there's a
there's an ancient drive in here you
know the the writings go back to Plato
and Aristotle but the self-consciousness
arises particularly in the late
eighteenth and nineteenth and twentieth
century so the word eugenics is coined
by Francis Galton a cousin of Darwin's
and Bolton imagines that you know if
that he could that he can he and others
can manipulate human heredity to produce
better human beings and thereby improve
the human condition in general alleviate
suffering and improve the human
condition in general and in fact one of
the things that's important about
eugenics in this first phase is that it
is embraced by many Victorian
progressives it is thought to be a
progressive idea it's thought to be an
idea which we should be subscribing to
because what else what other better way
that is there to improve the improve the
human condition then take the you know
take the horns and the reins of heredity
in your own hands
many many famous Victorian progressives
sign on to this then you can list them
in the bed they're listed in the book
and then there's a second phase the
second phase is the tray is that
eugenics then moves to the United States
so it undergoes a kind of manic
adolescence in the United States this is
a time from around 1910s to the 1930s
when it is also the rage in the United
States Offices of the eugenics Record
Office is soon set up and in in in the
in in England eugenics meant selective
breeding in America the twist twist was
placed on it eugenics became the
possibility of selective sterilization
that if you were an imbecile or a [__]
or or had genetic who was perceived to
be genetic or
any problems we should remind people
that those were technical terms
imbecile [__] it is one people yeah in
fact yeah I point that you know it's
pointed out in the book but I'm using
these and they were they were they were
loosely used but they were powerful
technical terms invented to sort of
service the eugenic engine you know if
you had a particular level of
intelligence you were called an imbecile
or a [__] or a high-grade [__]
low-grade [__] etc but but the point
was that very soon by the by the late
1920s and the early 1930s even the
courts in the United States had agreed
that in fact men and women who had these
kinds of hereditary traits should be
sterilized by state mandate and thereby
again in in in the in the hopes of
improving human heredity and many men
and women were in fact sterilized based
on these grounds and the story that I
tell in the book is that of Carrie buck
a young woman who was falsely probably
found to have a hereditary condition of
imbecility as I said most likely because
of really manipulation of information by
the state and she was forcibly
sterilized that the case rose to the
Supreme Court
and Oliver Wendell Holmes the so-called
judicial moderate said three generations
of imbeciles is enough that word enough
signals something a kind of impatience
with with you know let's just let's just
get on with it you know this is a time
when better babies contests were part of
you know a fair you you go to a railroad
fare or on the playground and and
there'd be a better babies contest to
select the best babies etc there were
films about sterilization in in the
United States so that's the second phase
and the third phase is the one that
we're most familiar with is that that
the idea that metastasizes to Germany
where from selective reading and
selective sterilization it morphs into
selective extermination if you you know
if
in England you know we could read the
better humans in the United States we
could sterilize them and thereby prevent
them their births then in in in Nazi
Germany the logic was extended why not
just exterminate them and on that
grounds initially the German scientists
began to exterminate again following the
United States those that are considered
genetically genetic defectives this is
their terminology and very soon that
morphed into the idea that you know
genetic defectives well why not you know
why not then exterminate racial
defectives and thereby the that that
ultimately launched what we know is sort
of racial eugenics in Nazi Germany the
extermination of Jews and and other
races as well yeah well one clear
variable here is just the the means of
intervention available to us so in a
world where the only choice is between
selective breeding for sterilization and
exterminating people well clearly those
methods are so crude that they would
only tempt people who are either
fundamentally deranged by some ideology
or lacking in compassion to a degree
that is just pathological that's
interesting let me interrupt this the
what's interesting is that is that I I
agree and disagree with that
and that's the point of part of the
first part of this book in fact when
when the when the Victorians were
speaking or I should say Ben Gordon and
his associates were speaking about human
heredity in this manner
one thing I should said I think I spoke
a little too loosely in grouping
selective breeding with the other two I
mean I see how selective that in fact
the we should remember and be very
remind it remind ourselves that this
history was a gradual stepping into into
blood as it were and and in fact it's
not as if the Nazis almost and one day
woke up and said oh you know this would
be a nice way to improve the human human
race they followed the the road to that
the the road
to hell through the best genetic
intentions of of the progressives of the
1890s and 1900s in the United States and
and in in England yeah yeah and again it
comes down to the technical means
available so for instance if if the
question is whether or not a person with
a heritable disability should be allowed
to have a child that will have that
disability or it will likely have that
disability that's a very interesting and
difficult ethical question depending on
what the disability is and the
likelihood that some as yet unborn child
will inherit it but it becomes a
trivially easy question to answer in
favor of intervention if the
intervention is trivial to apply so if
you told me that well this aspiring
mother who doesn't want the state to
meddle in her life at all you know
stands a 99% chance of giving birth to a
deaf child say but if she'll simply take
this vitamin that's otherwise harmless
needed twice during her pregnancy the
risk of this will be removed well then
yeah she the state has an interest in
ensuring she takes that vitamin right it
would be criminally negligent on her
part not to take that vitamin and
there's a continuum from that you know
harmless and and trivially easy
intervention to the removal of her
uterus right by a state so again
absolutely correct but but to remind
ourselves and we're fostering a little
bit but it's important too but to keep
keep reminding ourselves that in in
reality genetics the genetic information
in humans has turned out to be more
complicated and thereby raised the
specter of more complicated questions
yeah so again just use your analogy to
run along the structure of analogy for
many diseases the the odds turn out not
to be 99 percent but turn out to be you
know something like 20% 30% and some of
these diseases are very dependent on
other genes that the that that child
would inherit so the context
and on the environment just to give you
a concrete example and this is very
intimate example you because it happened
to me recently I was giving a talk on
cancer genetics and after after that a
woman with the brca1 mutation Braca one
mutation with the terrifying history of
breast cancer came to me to talk to me
afterwards
and she said her mother and her
grandmother had died of breast cancer um
she was she had had two children she was
thinking about having another one the
question she was asking is should she
and could she eliminate the bracket one
gene mutation forever from her lineage
and the answer is if not now very soon
basically we have the technologies to
allow her to do that we have the
technologies that you know she could do
that by selectively implanting an embryo
which lacks that genetic variation and
if in the future we might be able to do
that by selectively changing the genomes
offers per managed carrying cells or
making cells so but remember in her case
the child will not have a 99% chance we
actually what's interesting about it we
can't really predict we can predict that
the child was born with the baraka one
gene mutation will have a multiple
higher fold risk of having breast cancer
in her future and other cancers but
breast cancer in her future
but we cannot looking at her genome or
looking at her tell you whether it's
going to be at age 30
at age 60 at age 70 is it going to be an
indolent variant of cancer it can be
likely very aggressive um where it's
going to spread all this information is
weirdly hidden from us we can tell you
that there is risk and there's
propensity for risk this is a tenfold
risk or something around her you know I
don't know what the newest numbers are
for Braca one but at let's say 10 fold
well so unless the braket gene confers
some other benefit that I'm unaware of
what would be the argument against
eliminating it there's some arguments
about against eliminate Braca one is it
is an intermediate example I'll give you
another more extreme examples in a
second but the arguments against
eliminating it and right now are we
don't know exactly whether we can we can
use these technologies and
way if you think about it's in the doing
as it were if you think about the if you
think about the the intervention into
sperm and egg forming cells when we do
these genetic interventions we're doing
these in the lab it with other genes not
with bracket1 but with other genes that
we've discovered when we're doing this
in the lab you know they had these
interventions these technologies allow
us to do powerful genetic interventions
in stem cells but they're the you know
they sometimes miss and they reach a
different target they're off target
effects so that's one the second one is
that the interventions that we are that
were doing often as I said occur in the
context of other of other genes so we
know very little about how other genes
and environments influence it sure Braca
one will be an example of a genetic
variation where we will and our are
already and will allow genetic
interventions in the future and insofar
as it gets simpler if you go to
something like cystic fibrosis then it's
a pretty easy decision isn't it to
eliminate it it is an it is an easy
decision to allow the elimination
socially speaking it's an easy decision
to allow the elimination because of the
because the fact that that the disease
that it's linked to causes extraordinary
suffering whether an individual woman
chooses to or not to exercise that
decision I think should be left up to
her and and and you know the point is
that it one of the things that the
history is teaching us I think is that
that state mandates are not very not
very successful here because they end up
intervening on individual liberties so
the state states can provide guidance
they can provide the options of what
would happen but it seems to me that
that once the state got into the
business of forsome forcing a woman to
have only one you know a prescribed kind
of genetic lineage I think for me that
steps a little too far but now is that
intuition of yours technology dependent
I think your picture in kind of a forced
in vitro
conception as opposed to a natural one
whereas if the intervention could be as
easily applied as taking a harmless pill
then did you still feel the same way
about it again I'm talking about cystic
fibrosis
III think I would feel the same way but
I don't think it's intervention
dependent I think it has to do with
allowing humans the Liberty to choose
what kind of heredity they choose to
transmit and there's some historical
precedent for this you know obviously a
Down syndrome is a is a is a good is an
important historical precedent for this
which is that the the state provides
guidance as to what the what the life of
a child with Down syndrome may be like
and even there that we very very very
much know there's a wide spectrum you
know Down syndrome is is has a wide
spectrum but of course there are
important medical consequences of Down
syndrome the state provides guidance but
it doesn't go and tell women that you
know you can't have that child right i
it seems to me that cystic fibrosis is a
clearer case and it may be not that
clear as possible but getting there both
in the simplicity of the underlying
genetics and in the cloud without a
silver lining outcome and then when you
when you try to map it on to other
ethical imperatives so for instance just
to remind guy I mean this is a side note
Sam but it's an important reminder just
remind it to remind us that we think
that the Cystic Fibrosis gene variant
that now causes disease was likely
selected at a time when gastrointestinal
diseases like typhoid were rampant
throughout Europe and that gene variant
likely protected people from dying now
this is not I'm not trying to be so you
know wax eloquent about a history that's
long past we are in most countries in
the United in the West do not have these
threats of typhoid but but just to
remind you that these gene variants were
in some cases selected for very
particular environmental conditions yeah
yeah well that's a great point that I
actually want to get to in a slightly
different context because
presents a fascinating limitation on our
ability to use this technology even if
we get our heads straight ethically but
I'm just making it back to thee to this
particular intervention the feeling that
I should oblige my children to wear
seatbelts whether they want to or not
and whether I want them to or not and
that the state has an interest in my
doing that because it's not much fun to
see needlessly injured or dead children
show up at the ER day after day when
they could have just been wearing a
seatbelt why isn't there a widened their
seatbelt law for genetics
yeah seatbelt law for unborn children on
some level again when the I think they
are pointing out exactly the reason that
because seatbelts are we do not we are
aspirations and and personhood are not
linked in the same way to seatbelts as
they are to to heredity and that may be
because of vast cultural reasons it may
be because of an enormous a particular
interest in heredity but but but we have
we have carved out a special place
within ourselves within our culture's
that says look the the autonomy that we
have around heredity is an autonomy that
that should be respected
unless there are truly extraordinary
circumstances and even when they're
extraordinary circumstances you know I
I've taken care of many children with
Down's syndrome who have leukemia in
fact this is one of their terrifying
things that happens and so there is no
doubt that that is an extraordinary
circumstance and there's extraordinary
suffering involved but even in such
cases we decided partly because of the
history and partly because of the
special place we've carved out for our
aspirations around heredity to provide
strong guidance but not step beyond the
lines of strong guidance we've left it
to individuals it's just a fascinating
area ethically which I haven't thought
as much about as I would like because
just in hearing you say that now
really is what we're privileged een the
aspirations of the parents over the
experience of their future children in a
way that wouldn't make a lot of sense if
the children already existed so you know
there several philosophers and
biologists and geneticists were
grappling with this question now so you
know to what extent you have to take
into account the unborn voice of the of
the child it's really it's a fascinating
and important debate but the point here
being that I've given you my perspective
on on this but the point here being that
it being that this debate will become
increasingly central yeah in seemly
central as we learn to read and write
genomes more and more right now we are
in a kind of learning phase a steep
learning phase of reading and writing we
are like the child who's just begun to
discover the language so again to remind
ourselves if you're if your genome was
written out in in the in standard print
your genome Sam would be 70 or 80 full
sets of the Encyclopedia Britannica it
would you know fill your whole house we
are beginning to learn of course you now
know through gene sequencing that in
fact the active parts of that
encyclopedia not the entire entire
encyclopedia but the active parts of the
inside Siberia you can you can obtain
the sequence for for about two thousand
or dollars the first one the full
sequence but the first human was was
about three billion that was in 2001 the
prediction I just came back from a
conference in Seattle prediction is that
we fall down to about 300 dollars per
person not the full genome but the
active parts of the genome so reading
and writing that information reading it
in the sense understanding what that
code predicts for the future and in
writing it understanding how and where
to intervene on it change one word in
that 70 set encyclopedia is going to be
the central question one of the central
questions that our children will face
and the conversation we just had to what
extent should we mandate to us and
should we dictate are going to be
questions that our children grapple with
this will and I and I keep making this
point these technologies to intervene on
human heredity will seem will make the
technologies that we seem to be obsessed
with today like social media etcetera
like absolute child's play they will
brush them aside like a like a like a
fly on a summer day because they will
get to again these very old human
aspirations about controlling our
children and ourselves yeah and just to
point out the technological trend you
just sketched there that's a three
billion down to three hundred dollars to
sequence a genome and about what twenty
years that's a ten million fold
reduction in the cost it's incredible
and and the one thing I will add to this
and maybe we will have time to discuss
this but just just to just to keep
people current we are currently using
computational tools and human tools to
inspect genomes to read and write and
the amount of data that we've collected
is quite small compared to the total
amount there is so you know tens of
thousands of and maybe going into the
hundreds of thousands of individual
human genomes but imagine now on
increasing that that apparent data set
and then unleashing tools like deep
learning on on on on that data set and
picking up patterns that would not be
apparent to the human eye or potentially
to even standard computational ways to
mine information imagine now for every
human being being able to create a kind
of predictive algorithm about their
future it really distorts and has has an
effect on how we think of ourselves I'll
give you one very concrete example
another woman with keeping on the same
breast cancer theme another woman with
bracket1 gene mutation has two daughters
and she told me the story she was very
concerned and got herself sequence for
Braca wan and her two children the two
daughters are 11 and 9 so and one of
them turned out to be positive for the
carrying the mutation so the question
which was immediately raised to me was
you know these children have not even
developed breasts they are in their in
their adolescence in yet already the
mother's relationship with one of them
and both of them has fundamentally
changed she does not see her two
daughters as the same anymore
imagine doing this not across one Jane
but across the you know several thousand
genes that human beings have parsing our
us in these kinds of propensity is
parsing us in these kinds of probability
probabilities even if they're
probabilistic well that's a point worth
flagging because people will need to
learn to think about probability in ways
that are far more insightful and and
ethically relevant than they have been
led to thus far I mean but we were
terrible about thinking about the
implications of probability and and you
can give people the same probabilities
in different guises you know the
probability of a loss versus the
probability of a gain and and their
feelings about the scenario is
completely shift and and and they've
been given the same information and
that's been documented in Psychological
study after psychological study that
same idea
but but yes absolutely getting to that
central point of the of this which is to
say that and let me be very clear about
something and it's very clarified in the
book many times and let me be clear
about it yet again that in most cases
for most human features genes are not
autonomous they interact with the
environments they interact with chance
to produce the ultimate feature most
human features that we commonly see are
the products of multiple genes intervene
variants interacting with each other
interacting with environments in
interaction with chance so not only is
there the probability of how to the
combinatorial business of the genome we
which gene variants you inherit in what
combination but of course there's a role
for the environment which is which has
to be factored in and may be factored in
in the future and a role for chance
which may be factored in in the future
and there's this additional problem
which you've just raised a moment ago
which is that there is no clear boundary
between what's wrong with us and what's
right with us it was and this is a point
you actually spell out in your book at
some length the genes that make people
creative for instance could be some of
the same genes and it seems rather
likely that some of them are that
predispose people to conditions like
bipolar disorder and every there's
evidence I think with respect to
intelligence as well that some of the
genes that are highly correlated with
intelligent
are also correlated with certain
diseases like torsion dystonia so it
could just be it may be that there's
some in the end engineering solution by
which we can get around this but it
could be that there will always be
trade-offs here that if you're going to
grab the dial that can be turned in the
direction of slightly more intelligence
or even much greater intelligence or
probability thereof you are you have
your hand on the same dial that is
increasing the likelihood that your
child will be in a wheelchair
well the examples that we know best I
gave you a couple cystic fibrosis is one
of them that gene variant was selected
for in we think in conditions where
endemic typhoid was rampant sickle cell
anemia is another one that gene variant
was selected for because it protects if
you have one bit if you have one copy it
protects from malaria and and
potentially cerebral malaria and and so
you know there are there are more and
more isolated examples of this over time
and we'll you know when I I try to
describe this very clearly in in the
book which is an idea which with medical
geneticists began to have in the 1960s
and 1970s
particularly as we began to understand
the human genome in terms of medical
genetics you know when the human when
the genome when the genetics was an
abstraction or you know bacteria this is
what happens and this is how regulation
happens in abstraction things had seemed
somewhat simpler but once you cut came
into the human genome all the things
that you are not talked about began to
be true or began to read true most human
traits are not the product of single
genes but of multiple genes our capacity
to manipulate multiple genes is
fundamentally constrained
although changing we'll come to that in
a second
the capacity predict future phenotype
future traits future characteristics
from a single genome remains in its
infancy and may be fundamentally
constrained because of environmental and
chance effects and the possibility that
there are trade-offs in when you select
for something that you inherently toggle
the switch in one direction and and
toggle the switch in the wrong
direction for something else may be true
for certain gene variants again the
moment you start talking about this you
you feel the presence of various taboos
all around you and there's just this
fundamental fact that people are
uncomfortable hearing about the genetic
basis of of many things and it certainly
certainly mental traits and things like
mental illness because they assume that
spelling this out likely produces
suffering in people and likely would
lead to social policies that are counter
to what we what we want
ethically and politically but I think we
should also notice ways in which it can
alleviate suffering in a very
straightforward way so you take the
condition like schizophrenia and this is
something you discuss in your book it
used to be believed that this condition
was produced by bad parenting
and that you had this notion of a
schizophrenic mother and now we know
that Gene's play an enormous role in
this disease and I think the concordance
between identical twins is something
around 80% just imagine having been
among the this generation of mothers who
were blamed for the mental illness of
their children and blamed in terms of a
psychosexual mythology that was more or
less invented out of whole cloth by
Freud and it seems like a genetic
understanding of a condition like
schizophrenia is it just a huge ethical
game and the game arrives almost
immediately correct
so the although you're absolutely
correct we understand so much more and
and I really have the ball with a kind
of a sense of a deeper understanding of
schizophrenia but also the example of
schizophrenia has reminded us that in
schizophrenia particularly in in
familiar schizophrenia the kind of my
family has we're yet to find powerful
genetic mechanistic understanding of the
disease it will come I believe but but
in fact yes it's it's alleviated certain
kinds of ways of thinking about
schizophrenia that were very
incriminating and and ultimately
destroyed families and souls I wonder
mentioned something you said in a in
your TED talk I believe which struck me
as fairly flabbergasting you said of the
the estimated 1 million physiological
pathways in the human body that can be
targeted by medical therapies or cures
for diseases we can currently target
about 250 of them yeah that number came
came from an article which I can send
you at some point of time obviously so
it's a little bit of a guesswork there
right so someone tried to estimate the
number of biological pathways for which
there are targets exist and that numbers
increasing but yes I would say a
ballpark that sounds right to me
on its face that's a very depressing
ratio although the flipside is that it
suggests an almost limitless promise of
medicine in the future I mean if what
we're doing now is just the tiniest
tiniest fraction of what could
conceivably be done with more or less
the technology we already have which is
to say you know pharmacology you can see
it one of two ways it's either
depressing or a picture of limitless
promise so and this is one one important
piece to intervene on that which is that
is a denominator problem which is that
the parts of that equation that are
responsible for disease or can we
manipulate for enhancement may be a tiny
fraction to start with
in other words much of the much of the
much of these pathways these proteins
these the consequential cogs and wheels
much of them might be sort of the the
bedrock on which human physiology and
structure and form are built and
therefore intervening on them wouldn't I
would neither enhance nor not cure
disease it would basically either create
a dysfunctional human being or none at
all so don't know what part what
fraction it's a denominator problem we
don't know what fraction of those
million odd pathways cogs and wheels as
it were what fraction of them are
relevant in human pathology and what
fraction can be manipulated for if
you're interested in enhancement what
fraction can be manipulated for
enhancement now
the state of genetic medicine at the
moment and perhaps you want to talk
about CRISPR here and and and whether
you think it will fulfill its promise so
genetic medicine is a very wide term so
it's probably better to be a little bit
narrower about it because you know some
people would say marry medicine is you
know all kinds of medicines genetic
medicine so you know ultimately diseases
act on proteins and pathways which are
themselves the product of genes so you
could make the idea so let's talk
particularly about gene therapy maybe
that's a naturally to restrict it so
there are a couple of ways to imagine
gene therapy but the big the bright line
distinction is between so-called somatic
gene therapy and germline gene therapy
and and in full disclosure I'm involved
in in in quite a lot of somatic gene
therapy work so so so let me just walk
us through these terms so somatic comes
to the word soma which means body so
this is gene therapy in which you're
either introducing a gene foreign gene
foreign material or any kind of genetic
material into a cell often into a stem
cell in the human body and that cell
divides replicates or maybe doesn't
divide nonetheless contains that altered
gene etic information and thereby
changes its function and and starts
doing a different function so a classic
example would be an attempt to put the
functioning version of a functioning
version of a clotting factor gene in
people who have a hereditary problem
with blood clotting such as hemophilia
so that is a distinct from so-called
germ line gene therapy in which what the
attempt is is to change the genetic
information in a cell that's capable of
producing sperm and eggs and ultimately
once it once it does release from an
eggs it basically now carries on goes on
to the next generation and then in
perpetuity it carries on forever so so
that's a bright line distinction between
somatic and germline gene therapy and
until the 1990s 2000s the first attempts
were in drum line gene therapy using
things like viruses so viruses can carry
genetic material into cells the
particular viruses that are evolved
millennia to carry genetic materials
into cells you can manipulate those
viruses you can mince
genes into them and then thereby allow
those viruses to bring genetic material
into human cells and that's one kind of
gene therapy and then this this world
was turned somewhat upside down by the
discovery of new technologies to change
genetic information and the one that
that is his that most people would want
to know about is a technology called
CRISPR and Casner now do you want me to
go into the technology or to tell you
what the what the what the upshot of the
the upshot is how detailed you want to
get it you could make a gloss on the on
the actual mechanics of it but more the
upshot I think yeah so so the the the
glossing over the mechanics of it the
upshot is that crisp blank as nine is an
ancient are parts of an ancient
bacterial system that allow us to make
intentional cuts in a genome of choice
and why is that why is that relevant
talk again to return to the encyclopedia
analogy you could go into you know the
the encyclopedia and say go to page 347
in volume 16 and and cut the word ATG CD
there and and hopefully only there will
come back to that in a second but
hopefully only there
sparing everything else and if you
combine it with some other techniques
not only can you make the cut there you
can replace that ATG CC with a CT GCC or
a GT GCC so obviously you know what if
that is the bracket one gene or what
have that statistic fibrosis gene and
what if you make those changes not in a
Cell that's a somatic cell but a
germline cell a cell that is permanence
so so CRISPR and Kaz 9 among other
things these kind of bacterial systems I
don't they're really systems or
technologies that allow us to make
intentional deliberate changes in
genomes and that we couldn't do easily
with with the kind of viral based gene
therapies that we had in the past so
they allow
a unprecedented level of being able to
manipulate genomes and potentially not
only genomes of other organisms
mosquitoes parasites pests crops etc but
also of course the human genome and and
if you combine these technologies with
what we are learning about stem cells
permanet reducing stem cells then all of
a sudden you have the kinds you have a
really unprecedented power to be able to
manipulate the germline of organisms and
humans in the future that's your option
yeah
and obviously the the bright line
between the somatic therapy and the
germline is that all future descendants
now inherit whatever changes you make as
opposed to the single person you have
provided a therapy to but you know I
guess in certain cases that strikes me
as a very easy decision and in others an
impossible one and it's it does come
down to just the probabilities involved
and how sure we are we know what the
effects will be of our of our
intervention right there's a nest of
questions their nest of ethical
questions and there's a nest of
biological questions or technical
questions and of course they're
interrelated they crisscross with each
other and you're pointing out all of all
of them so some of them are biological
and technical questions you know what
are the off-target effects what is the
likely that we'll hit that particular
word in encyclopedia and by mistake not
erase another word on page you know 476
so that's those are technical biological
questions but then of course there are
other questions like you know under what
circumstances should we allow this and
and this goes brings us back full circle
with as I said the National Academy
report which other other academies other
panels around the world will eventually
produce their own versions of this but
but but in that case and and in and in
the gene we identify I try to identify
some circumstances where we're beginning
to open up this germline technology
there's also some ethical questions
surrounding this work that really just
go to the the sociology of science I
guess first of all they're their patent
fights between the developers of CRISPR
right I think it's the Broad Institute
and Berkeley and then there's just this
whole phenomenon of having
government-funded work
in fact privately-owned and becomes
hugely profitable and then you basically
have the public paying twice for the
results of this work how do you view the
ethics of enriching yourself based on
research that was taxpayer funded and
hey is there something interesting to
sort out there yeah many of the
interesting things things to sort out
there a little bit about the patent
issues around genetics in in in the gene
you know it's it's so new this arena is
that the courts are still trying to
figure out about how to make sense of it
and just the case to point out was the
bracket1 gene mutation where was those
an attempt to patent the testing for
that gene mutation because after all
that was the product of discovery of
scientists but on the other hand you
could say well why is a bracket1 gene
mutation any different from your knows
it's a part of your body it's a part of
the human body so where is the invention
there so it it was a series of
complicated debates that ensued but of
course this has been carried to its next
level with with the debates around gene
editing these technologies that allow
you to intervene on on genetic
information in a deliberate manner and
the two sides of the debate are sure
these tools are borrowed from the micro
biological world so bacteria invented
them really through evolution but they
were refined and changed and programmed
and reprogrammed by individual
scientists so there's so one concern one
concern is should these be patentable at
all that's question one the second
question is who made the discovery first
what's the evidence that any one of the
teams made the discovery first and the
third set of questions which is is if
the discovery was in fact paid for
through government dollars should
individuals or companies be allowed to
use these same kinds of tools to sell
them back to us as a port actually my
views on on all three of these questions
but of course they differ so in reverse
order should should should they be
allowed I think you know I think as
as I think it's important to keep the
cycle of innovation alive I think it's
important to give important incentives
substantial incentives to scientists as
they bring their products of their
science into human lives cancer is one
example that I see on a daily basis I
think most people would feel that the
structure in a of incentives currently
it has bit has moved the needle has
tipped way too far I'm speaking for
myself and that we need to be able to
identify inventions that are that for
which where the line of credit and
substantial substantial compensation is
given and when that line gets crossed so
it's a case-by-case question
as you can imagine this is richly hotly
contested there's no one formula here I
think richly and hotly contested arena
many people including myself feel that
the first mover is the original
inventors should be given substantial
rewards the people who come later and
and sort of pile on to them the meat
tubes should be given much less I also
feel that the patents should not be
extended indefinitely based on you know
creating new applications for them but
much of the reward should come up front
but once you're done you're done but so
these are these are sort of the gory
details as it were the second and a
third question I'll answer quickly in
the interest of time the second question
was or one question was should these be
patentable I think in the case of
Crispin Kaz 9 the amount of human
intervention that went into the process
after the initial discovery is
substantial a lot of things had to be
done things that we hooked together the
the biological system invented by
microbes by bacteria was designed to
kill viruses to chop their genomes and
DNA up we redesigned it to focus it on
the human genome and in a programmable
way so I think there's a good case to be
made that there was substantial
innovation involved I should say that
anyone who wants to patent my nose is
free to do it it's broken at least once
and I consider it a Creative Commons
nose so if it's in my mind is not
particularly attractive either so I'm
happy
so um I have one bone to pick with you I
wasn't necessarily planning to bring
this up but it's become a sore spot for
me personally in my life and you sort of
bumped into it I recently had Charles
Marie on the podcast yeah and now as you
might predict being attacked as a racist
in certain circles for merely having had
a perfectly cordial conversation with
him and many listeners in anticipation
of this podcast with you have reminded
me that you were more critical of Marie
in your book than I was when I had him
on the podcast and so they they want us
to discuss this so I you know I don't we
don't have spent a lot of time on this
and we certainly will have to spend a
lot of time on Marie we can talk about
that just a general question of
intelligence but I read obviously what
you wrote in your book and then I went
back and read the relevant chapters in
the bell curve and it seems to me that
like nearly everyone who writes about
Marie you seem to feel under
considerable pressure to distance
yourself from his reputation and in my
view this led you to make at least a
couple of obvious mistakes but to really
get into this I would have to read the
passages from your book out loud on the
podcast which I'm not going to do and I
have to read a fairly long passage from
Marie but I can summarize I can
summarize our differences and I think
they're not I don't think they're
mistakes I think that let me let me flag
once I know so there's one difference
which I do want to talk about which is
not necessarily a mistake and it's
definitely a point of valid debate but
there were a couple of moves you made
there that struck me at the very least
sloppy and I just want to flag them for
you and and listeners so that so that
they can go look at both books if they
care and you can go back and look at
what I'm talking about because I feel
like I'm gonna take just one example the
use you made of there's a transracial
adoptee study there's a there was a
study of kids that had one or two
biological parents who were black and
they were adopted by white parents right
and so this was a as a study by scar and
Weinberg and you cite this study
pointing out that the adopted children
had a mean IQ of 106 and they say that's
even higher than the white average and
you single this out as some of the
strongest evidence that the the IQ
testing was was biased but Skaar and
Weinberg did a follow-up study which is
again described in the same paragraph in
Murray's book that significantly muddied
the waters that showed that racial like
he was stratified in their follow-up
study and you don't cite that study
right which is so when you go back to
look at Murray after reading your book
this seems like a fairly glaring
oversight at least but this again this
is something that's hard to parse
without just reading the text I should
just say honestly this is not a topic
that has ever interested me it's like I
I simply wanted to talk to Murray after
I saw what happened to him at Middlebury
and where I realized with some degree of
shock that I had always assumed that
where there was that much smoke there
had to be fire and I assume that when
you have people like Richard Nisbett
calling you a racist and a pseudo
scientist you must be guilty of
something but you now I have Nisbet
calling me or at least insinuating that
I'm a racist and a pseudo scientist as
recently as 24 hours ago he published a
piece in in Fox magazine which is
completely confused
responding to the podcast I did with
Murray let me tell you what I think that
subjective issues are and I'll try to
summarize them and then we'll just
finish this final points because my
interest here is not in the genetics of
intelligence and certainly not in racial
disparities in intelligence genetic or
otherwise I've always felt that looking
for racial differences in anything is a
dubious thing to do or at least I
haven't heard a good justification for
it but what I'm very interested in is in
the way in which it's becoming
impossible to talk about facts when they
brush up against these taboo rails and
and the toxicity of this it's just very
difficult to digest in one's life and
when I look at them I can't imagine how
Murray
has felt these last 23 years this is a
man who has been treated incredibly
unfairly and and again I would argue
that you're by no means a glaring
example of this but even in your case I
feel if you go back and look you will
discover that he was not hiding the ball
the way you claimed he was hiding the
ball and that you were that you are not
making a totally fair use of what was in
his book so I just invite you to go look
at that again but let's talk horas ponds
with Charles in the pre-publication
stage of this book right so someone at
I'm happy to share that and it was you
know it was a it was an extremely civil
correspondence I wanted to get to the
heart of the issue the point that you're
making about the star Weinberg study and
in subsequent studies is exactly right
there were muddy studies and the the the
central point in in the Jean is to point
out number one that there were muddy
studies and to draw strong conclusions
from muddy studies in either direction
is is unwarranted that is this that is
the point that I leave in the book it
just is to say that so it's it's a nun
it's unfair to say that oh you know did
I do an in you know this is this is that
and that is the big d counter so let me
give you what I think is is that the
three questions and I'll tell you my
thoughts about them I think Charles is
thoughtful about these I I worried that
he that you know he has he is
over-interpreted muddy studies that's
not a crimp that's not a criminal thing
to do it is a de job of a very
thoughtful journalist to try to
interpret in muddy studies but it's
equally important to remind us that the
studies are inconclusive on several
aspects so let me just split the
question into three questions but before
you do that I just I just want to again
what we got to be forgive me if as a
host I begin to speak a little more
defensively here but we're recording
this podcast really just like as a
tsunami of criticism is breaking over me
from my podcast with Charles so yes some
studies are certainly muddy and and the
data is not in on everything but there
are some findings where the jury really
is no longer out yeah so interrupt me if
you think that the jury did that I'm
that I'm
mudding mudding studies that are not
fine so with a question number one
question number one is does the IQ test
predict it is it is it a great surrogate
for intelligence so I would say it's the
following which is that this is this
issues been studied although much is to
be done in the future and it depends on
who you ask so if you're if if it's
about certain aspects of performance
sure it predicts certain aspects of
performance in this world but it
actually is a relatively poor predictor
of other aspects of performance
including aspects of academic
performance so in some cases it
correlates highly with with how you will
perform in the world in other cases it
it correlates rather poorly with how you
perform in the world I think that's what
the jury that's that's the general case
of what the Julie says would you agree
that with that well yeah this is a great
way to proceed let's just go point by
point so in certain cases that's true
but that's it's a slightly tendentious
way of describing it so for instance IQ
for certain things is necessary but not
sufficient or having a high IQ is
necessary but not sufficient so there
are other things clearly like motivation
an ability to defer pleasure right you
do and and set goals I mean these are
our features that don't aren't
necessarily tied to IQ and have a lot to
do with the in terms of explaining
differential success between people but
if you're going to tell me you know
what's your prospect of success as a
theoretical physicist with a an IQ of a
hundred not great yes but the point I
agree with that but the point here is to
clarify and say say that the world is
not made of theoretical physicists the
world it's very very different people
some people who you know it's made of Li
Krasner's and theoretical physicists and
people who are athletes and and Queen
Elizabeth the other way of saying that
is that intelligence it's not the only
thing we value or that will get you good
outcomes in life but there is let's talk
about the
you have a quibble with with the how we
define intelligence was which i think is
right at the heart here so talk about
the problem in defining this notion of
general intelligence by correlating the
outcome of an IQ test with differential
success in life because you talk about
that I'm a cancer scientist and a
geneticist one of the things that I'm
always looking for is is is what's
called a you can call it a gold standard
or what this what's the standard by
which it will be judged in other words
when we measure something what are we
trying to correlate that what is the
endpoint of that by which there is an
independent or a non dependent variable
that we can use to judge whether what
we're measuring is worthwhile measuring
or not and the but the but the point is
that when we use the word intelligence
that is a powerful culturally loaded
word we're saying very much about we're
not talking about the performance on a
test we're talking about a very
culturally loaded word and so my point
here is that it would be helpful if you
count for example if it turned out that
the IQ test was correlated a hundred
percent with a performance in diverse
activities in the world ranging from you
know the Bron James to Queen Elizabeth I
would say fine you know that's that's a
good test currently the the current
format of the test seems to predict
something about our capacity to process
information in a particular way what
it's used in the world in the real world
is I'm not so sure about and that's what
that's that's the first thing I'm saying
about that you know don't confuse the IQ
test with the word intelligence well
actually I think you say something
different in your book which is seems to
be granting that there is a fairly
strong correlation between the results
of an IQ test and success in areas where
the canonical notion of general
intelligence is valuable so for instance
exactly correct economical notion
suggested in other words this there's a
circularity in this test which which
does not apply to the broad real world
so let's say that we agree on on on
these disagreements can I go into the
second piece because it's rapid
before you do that there seems to be a
bit of confusion here because it does
apply to the broad real world it's just
that the broad real world has been made
by the same people who make IQ tests so
imited to make this simple like it so if
an IQ test puts great weight on the size
of a person's vocabulary and then we
find that people with big vocabularies
succeed in academia this is a circular
justification because it's the same
people in academia that's the that's the
point that I make several times in the
book I do with a hundred percent yes
okay I just wanted to make that clearly
stated so the second question which is
relevant here is whether testing on the
IQ test is heritable or inheritable so a
very important point and so and it's
very important to distinguish between
those two words heritable and
inheritable so when we talk about
something being heritable we're asking
the question is there a powerful or not
powerful moderate genetic component to
it when we talk about something mean in
heritable we're asking the question how
likely is it that that set of genes or
components marches across generations in
an intact form so clearly understood
Europe so the way we measure here the
question of whether something is
heritable or not is two twin studies and
I very clearly point out and I in fact
this I I owe this to this correspondence
with charles murray in which it is i
think it is very believable that the
results of the IQ test are moderate to
highly heritable in other words twins
share concordance in in such in such
affairs we also know based on studies of
identical versus fraternal twins that
multiple genes and gene environment
interactions are probably involved
because no single gene is seems to be
highly correlated individually there are
certain genes that have been looked at
and we talked about some of them so the
direct consequence of that is that IQ is
a very is one of the many human features
which is heritable but not easily
inheritable right so i agree with that
but just to give some context here we
are now speaking in a context where
murray and now i get attacked for saying
that IQ is significantly heritable and
when this is in fact one of the most
consistent findings in behavioral
genetics in fact Robert Plomin and
colleagues just published an article I
think three months ago titled
the top ten replicated findings in
behavioral genetics and the heritability
of IQ is one of them so this is like
this is one of the things that is regret
I mean you know so I think that you at
least with me with with the gene you
can't find fault with the distinction
between heritability and in heritability
I think people use that language
incorrectly we should be using that
language correctly heritability is not
the same as in heritability and when you
say something is heritable
you're not saying something is in
heritable that's that's just because
those two words have similar derivations
but if people want to engage in this
debate with you and Charles and other
people they should look at the
literature and the answer is yes and
just to spell out another point here
again this is what's so crazy making
about this is that most of the criticism
I see of Marie and certainly most of the
criticism I have seen of my conversation
with him relies on asserting that we
claim things that we didn't and ignoring
things that we in fact said so one point
to make here is that even if something
like intelligence is highly heritable
you know eighty percent say heritable
you don't know to what degree
individuals intelligence was the product
of environmental influence let me take a
clearer case that just is not charge and
it's a case that I brought up with Marie
something like height is unambiguously
heritable and if we found an island of
people who were you know five feet tall
just knowing that they're five feet tall
wouldn't tell us that they don't have
the genetic ability to be as tall as the
Dutch because we'd have to find out
whether they're being systematically
stunted say by malnutrition you don't
know based on the outcome whether there
is a genetic explanation for what you
see and and in fact I this is the very
example that I use in the gene you know
when you look at a plant I use the word
I use the plant it's the human being
when a plant is grows to a certain size
you don't know whether that size is the
product of nutrition or the soil or the
environment or its genes yes okay we
agree about that it seems perfectly yes
so so I I'm sorry again about the slack
but it seems to me that there's a
fundamental misconception about the
difference between heritability and in
heritability you won't find any beef
with me I think in asserting that G and
what what the IQ test measures and you
have some even I have some disagreement
with what it may exactly it measures but
what it measures is heritable but not
easily inheritable so let's talk about
what it measures because I agree with
you that there is clearly some cultural
construction so I want to go back to the
point we were we were discussing a few
moments ago but you want to finish the
third question you want to go oh sure
yeah question which which we can also
spend a lot of time so the first
question we asked is what is like you
measure what its relationship with the
real world is and the circularity of
that argument the second question is the
distinction between heritability and in
heritability of IQ we we I agree with
Charles about this in fact it's it would
be hard to find data against this the
third question is the this racial
genetics so we agree we've talked about
the first two to what extent is is race
then has to do with the works and does
it have to be like you now things that
are heritable but not in heritable tend
not to run in in races even if you
construct them for the simple reason is
because of Mendelian genetics number two
is that the the gene spends a lot of
time questioning the idea of water races
the Victorian idea of race is being
rapidly reconstructed today rapidly and
dramatically being reconstructed a n is
being reconstructed in terms of
geographic distributions so
the the old ideas of divid of dividing
races we've turned out genetically
speaking are likely to contain lump
people in two categories where they
fundamentally don't belong because of
their background and because
particularly their racial and genetic
sorry not their racial but their
geographic background so this is just to
say that extraordinary claims demand
extraordinary evidence and the first
attempts to answer the third question to
my mind have not risen to that
extraordinary evidence in implicating or
cross segregating races with IQ because
the the term race itself is being
redefined right now but in my
understanding all of these data and I
think there is a lot you can view it as
agnostic with respect to the reality of
race or that were the the actual race of
any of the subjects but it's just based
on how people self-identify with respect
to race fair enough that's that by
definition could be circular but yes
fair enough so maybe you have we have a
tradition of people self identifying
with respect to the race they think they
are whether or not race is a valid
concept and then we're getting a
persistent and incredibly annoying
difference in the mean performance on IQ
tests on SAT tests on tests of
everything in this area and this is the
thing that is so toxic to talk about
it's not toxic to talk about once we
realize what the limitations are at
least for me it's not toxic but once we
realize as we've done now sequentially
realize what the fundamental limitations
and advantages of each of these
individual components are it's not toxic
at Rockwood as long as we understand the
pieces of the puzzle that allows I think
us to think about questions like how
circular is is definition how much does
it rely on particular constructions of
tests how much is the environment is
motivation a factor in someone taking a
test or not is is a self identification
of race real the the point is that there
it to me and I know this is not true for
Charles but to me the each of these
individual components if you
think about this as a vast machine each
of these individual components seems to
have enough fuzziness to it that making
a conclusion about the vast machine and
then making social policy conclusions
about the big machine it is is more
suspect than I think Charles thinks it
is this is not to say that these are you
know these are important questions but
they are you know there's an incredible
amount of fundamental slippage in
vocabulary and I hope again by having
this conversation at least we are
getting through some of those slippage
is a vocabulary yeah what but I don't
think Marie is guilty of the slippage
that is attributed to him and the
problem for me is that there is this
fictional version of his work and of the
man that has been manufactured in
response to the bell curve and then you
have everyone reacting to that fiction
and you know you know he's someone who
is still can't stand up at the
University and give a talk without some
reasonable threat of violence oh do you
my ID you my own correspondence my it
was extremely civil yeah we talk we talk
to me exchanged letters and thought
about genetics and I told him about you
know some of these fundamental concerns
or disagreements I have one last piece
that I'm going to tell you which I think
is important to all of this and that is
that that goes into a kind of
philosophical question it's not about
data crunching but as a philosophical
question about what we look for in the
human genome when we do my argument
which is actually obably the most
important argument in that section of
the gene when we look for performances
in particular tests the more we define
the test as a surrogate for whatever it
might be chances are that we will find
genetic determinants of that so I give
an example if we if we decided as a
society that beauty was having blue eyes
and sure enough you'd find a gene or a
set of genes that were correlated with
having do blue eyes and you would decide
that beauty is genetic this again gets
to the whole point which you are trying
to make which is my fundamental beef
with all of this is not the validity or
the heritability of the test my
fundamental problem is that these are
that there's a circularity in these
arguments and if we mean the genome is
narcissus reflected if we look for
narrow traits will find narrow traits in
the genome I believe that if we define
athletics in a very narrow way as the as
the capacity to run a particular
distance for a particular amount of time
there will be genetic correlates of that
idea and you and I can then have a
discussion about you know what the world
would be like if we all of a sudden
widen the definition of athletics to
include playing chess or you know
definition of sports to include playing
some other game that has nothing to do
with with with the particular
definitions that we have today my point
here is the following which is that as
we enter what is clearly a toxic arena
we just have to be very careful in
dissecting methodically in a clear-eyed
manner without assigning blame or
scribing blame what parts of the Machine
have data that is powerful and
functional versus what parts of the
machine I have data which is which is
more suspect because of a vast
historical cultural and a frankly racist
apparatus that has surrounded this
country don't other countries for years
that's all I'm trying to say so I want
to press on this point just for a couple
more minutes and I think this will be
the last thing we talk about on this
topic and then a guy I don't want to I
know your time is getting short as is
mine and I do want to ask you a few
questions about cancer but this is this
is just too interesting to leave right
here I take your point that we could
make arbitrarily narrow definitions of
anything and then test for them and then
we would find that you know there was a
genetic advantage in one group or
another for that thing and that would be
a strange thing to do but the definition
of something like intelligence and even
athleticism I think is a perfect analogy
or at least a very good one isn't as
arbitrarily circumscribed as all of that
to take athleticism our notion of that
of what it is to be a great athlete is
based rather obviously on the various
ways we can interact with the world
and there are clearly attributes rather
generalizable attributes like strength
and speed and agility and hand-eye
coordination and probably even things
like body symmetry right and the
underlying genetics of all of that that
correlate with success not only in
basically every sport you can name
but everything you could conceivably
invent let me stop you right there I
know where you're going I mean there are
some trade-offs right so if you want to
be profound profound trade also
weight-lift
and a marathon runner if you are into
sports not just athletes a chess player
versus a you know a long jumper okay but
again you can only this is only so
elastic here because yes we can
understand those trade-offs within a
larger cut print of what it means to be
a great athlete but when you take
someone like bo Jackson okay who for
those who don't recall and he's one of
the few people who played two
professional sports right he played
football and baseball at the highest
level now it is not a stretch to say
that whatever that if you came up with a
definition of athleticism that excluded
him you've got a pretty weird definition
now he's not gonna be the world's
greatest marathoner I would doubt that
but in the space of all possible sports
there is very unlikely to be a sport
where I'm gonna be better than bo
Jackson you know Gabe you've got us at
the same age and gave us the same
training in the new sport I'm not saying
I'm an especially terrible athlete but
but I'm just saying there's a reach okay
then he that Bo Jackson is going to beat
you at this new sport if it all relies
on strength but the word has turned away
from that can't you know basically we
have been finding less and less of such
general sportsmen
bo Jackson would do terribly against a
very average Kenyan marathoner he would
do terribly against a relatively average
basketball player I would imagine today
I don't know I don't know there's a
particular point there is that the world
has become in its in its newness in its
refinement in its diversity whether you
like it or not you dislike
whatever might be the idea in fact of
the general sportsman has become less
and less relevant today but it's still
not completely irrelevant and it's still
it's still highly relevant again I mean
I would just say that I would bet on Bo
Jackson against money go check out who
know who's running the marathon today
how many general sportsmen are in the
marathon because that's an extremely
unique phenotypic case it's not
emblematic of most sports right and then
it remains to be seen whether such
trade-offs exist yeah maybe this could
be where the in the analogy breaks down
I'm not so sure there is such trade-offs
with respect to intelligence and once we
build super intelligent machines right
imagine building a machine that's better
than us at everything we can plausibly
call a cognitive task well then in the
presence of such a machine this
conversation we're having is going to
seem pointless I mean then we it's gonna
be like chess all the way down right the
machine is just better than it than us
at facial recognition memory arithmetic
chess and everything else we can name
it's not clear that you're gonna get the
Kenyan marathon or trade off where we'll
be able to point to the thing that the
machine can't do and we'll never do that
doesn't convince me in either direction
I mean one thing that we know a little
bit about so I mean I've been thinking a
little bit about machines and machine
intelligence in medicine the one thing
that we know is that when you have a
machine maybe this is relevant when you
have a machine that's been partially
trained on one algorithm it tends to do
better on other algorithms
but you can read that as the cup half
full and half empty the cup half full
would say that sure that you know
there's there's some kind of general
ability that's been acquired by this
machine that now allows it to do to do
refinement another algorithm well we're
not there yet with machines I mean it's
clear that we're just there's nothing
like general intelligence emerging in
machines even though we do have some
general-purpose algorithms it's not I
mean they're they're still general
within a saying I mean the Machine
analogy doesn't help me very much
because I don't know enough but we don't
know enough about the structure of of
the way of knowledge acquisition skill
acquisitions and and potentially reason
acquisition in machines will learn but
I'm not sure we know enough take another
machine who that we do know a little bit
about if you take someone like John von
Neumann right is there any definition of
general intelligence that excluded John
von Neumann or where he didn't rank
extraordinarily high would be a bad
definition given the man's talents and
it's hard to see a lot of trade-offs
there now was he the world's greatest
poet probably not but it's well you just
gave an example but he the idea that he
would be a bad poet seems rather
far-fetched did he write any poetry I
have no idea I mean you know but but
every example that you've come up with
has exactly these kinds of endemic
problems right so my point is we didn't
arrive at our definition of intelligence
purely by accident or by whim it's not
like we just got fascinated with blue
eyes and blonde hair and said that's
that's beauty for all time but we did
arrive at its end by by a but by a
process of historical and cultural
mechanisms and my point again is my
point again is that there is a
circularity there and that's all I'm not
saying that you know I I will grant and
I have granted to to people who've
measured these qualities that in fact
the qualities correlate their highly be
highly correlated with actually highly
correlated through life it doesn't it's
not like they're stochastically vanish
incoming interaction that would be even
a bigger problem they don't will they
get more correlated through life so all
of this accepted I think Martin you know
just do
not to focus on but always accepted
actually I didn't listen to that
particular podcast but I think I feel
badly that that you know you're being
blamed for something you know people
aren't listening to exactly what you're
saying all of that said my you know this
is a relatively small section of the
gene but mice my argument will be that
who has been that there's a circularity
and narrow things are often found in the
genome if you define them narrowly and
those narrow definitions arise you're
right not entirely by women but by a
combination of of historical
circumstance which is worth questioning
that's all I'm okay well listen first I
just want to apologize to have ambushed
you with this particular topic because
it's just the weird conjunction of what
you wrote and what is happening on other
podcasts to me I was not entirely but
you know I wasn't a book signing and
someone said oh you know you're gonna
talk about this and I said only for
people not this is six this is six pages
of a 600 page book yeah so well you're
you're a good sport here and I
appreciate you get into the weeds with
me but obviously one of the things we
want intelligence for insofar as we've
defined it is for people like you to
cure cancer sooner rather than later
and I just want to take a few minutes to
talk about cancer unfortunately this is
not informed by my having read your much
celebrated book the Emperor of all
maladies on the topic but it's probably
safe to say that everyone listening to
this podcast has either had or will have
some encounter with cancer they're
either gonna get it or someone close to
them will my father died of cancer I
have a close member of my family who
just went through a major ordeal with it
it amazingly he seems to be someone who
is among the tiny percentage of people
who seems to have successfully treated
or been treated for Stage four
pancreatic cancer first I want to ask
you why does cancer have this unique
status I mean why are people left
battling cancer you don't hear people
battling
disease is this based on the the range
of treatments that exist for it or how
do you think of the diverse disease a
disease of enormous diversity genetic
diversity and there's not one cancer but
many cancers it is a disease unlike
heart disease unlike most other diseases
where the level of genetic diversity is
enormous and now we're beginning to
understand it's not just genetic
diversity there's also component a
powerful component to evolution here
cancer cells are constantly evolving and
they're evolving by creating their own
environments their own micro
environments they defy the immune system
through a process of selection and
evolution etc so it's a very different
kind of battleground as it were compared
to heart disease does it make sense to
keep classifying cancer in terms of
their organs of origin like lung and
breast and prostate is that or thinking
change in a halfway in halfway moment
about that it's certainly made sense
initially from from the standpoint but
now that now the genetics is is
redefining that so basically it took my
trainer that you're brain cancer could
share some genes with with the breast
cancer now that said when we try to
treat based on these kind of new genetic
paradigms those are still not very
successful in part because somehow or
the other cancer cell seems to remember
it's tissue of origin so suddenly truth
is somewhere in between
interesting but finally is is there any
important difference between childhood
and adult cancer it seems to me that
there there's some fundamental
differences between them they childhood
cancers tend to be more responsive to
many chemo therapies and the quick
answer is we don't know exactly why all
right I am sorry to have given one of
the most important diseases such short